hugo-blog/content/blog/indie-dev-first-time-founder-india-startup-guide.md, before:

---
title: "Indie Dev & First-Time Founder Guide: Register Your Startup in India (2026)"
date: 2026-02-01
draft: false
description: "Go LLP if you have a co-founder and want to move fast without raising soon. Pvt Ltd if you're raising VC money. Get a CA, virtual office, and bank account. Share capital minimum is ₹1 (not ₹1 lakh). Total: ₹25k-40k."
keywords: ["startup registration india 2026", "how to register startup in india", "LLP vs Pvt Ltd india startup", "indie dev india company registration", "first time founder india", "payment gateway india international", "startup registration cost india", "company registration checklist india"]
tags: ["startup", "india", "entrepreneurship", "founder-guide", "indie-dev"]
author: "Aditya"
images: ["/images/landing.jpg"]
---

{{< rawhtml >}}
<script type="application/ld+json">
{
  "@context": "https://schema.org",
  "@type": "Article",
  "headline": "Indie Dev & First-Time Founder Guide: Register Your Startup in India (2026)",
  "author": {
    "@type": "Person",
    "name": "Aditya",
    "url": "https://twitter.com/0x0elliot"
  },
  "datePublished": "2026-02-01",
  "dateModified": "2026-02-01",
  "publisher": {
    "@type": "Organization",
    "name": "ShipFast Blog",
    "url": "https://www.shipfast.blog",
    "logo": {
      "@type": "ImageObject",
      "url": "https://www.shipfast.blog/favicon.png"
    }
  },
  "description": "Go LLP if you have a co-founder and want to move fast without raising soon. Pvt Ltd if you're raising VC money. Get a CA, virtual office, and bank account. Share capital minimum is ₹1 (not ₹1 lakh). Total: ₹25k-40k.",
  "image": "https://www.shipfast.blog/images/landing.jpg",
  "mainEntityOfPage": {
    "@type": "WebPage",
    "@id": "https://www.shipfast.blog/blog/indie-dev-first-time-founder-india-startup-guide/"
  },
  "articleSection": "Startup Guide",
  "wordCount": 1500
}
</script>
<script type="application/ld+json">
{
  "@context": "https://schema.org",
  "@type": "FAQPage",
  "mainEntity": [
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "How much does it cost to register a startup in India in 2026?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "Total cost ranges from ₹25,000-40,000. This includes LLP registration (₹8,000-15,000), virtual office for 11 months (₹17,000-22,000), and GST registration (free to ₹10,000 if done through a CA)."
      }
    },
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "What is the difference between LLP and Pvt Ltd for Indian startups?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "LLP (Limited Liability Partnership) has less compliance burden and faster setup, ideal for bootstrapped startups with co-founders. Pvt Ltd is required if you plan to raise VC funding, as investors can't easily invest in LLPs. LLP requires 2+ partners, Pvt Ltd allows 2-15 directors."
      }
    },
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "How long does it take to register a company in India?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "Ideally 3-4 weeks if you have all documents ready: DSC (1-2 days), DIN (3-5 days), Name Approval (2-4 days), Incorporation (5-7 days), Virtual Office (1-2 weeks), Bank Account (1-2 weeks), GST (7-15 days). First-time founders often take 3-5 months due to document issues and learning curve."
      }
    },
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "Can indie devs accept international payments without a company in India?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "Most payment gateways (Stripe, Razorpay, PayU) require a registered company for international payments. DodoPayments is one option designed for indie devs that may work without full company registration, though regulatory landscape may change."
      }
    },
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "Do I need a physical office to register a startup in India?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "No. A virtual office (₹17,000-22,000 for 11 months) provides a registered business address that works for GST registration, bank accounts, and all official purposes. This is the standard approach for most indie devs and first-time founders."
      }
    },
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "Do I need a CA or lawyer to register a startup in India?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "A CA (Chartered Accountant) is highly recommended - they handle DSC, DIN, name approval, incorporation forms, and GST registration. You don't necessarily need a lawyer for basic registration. Services like Razorpay Rize bundle CA services. Expect to pay ₹8,000-15,000 for CA-assisted registration."
      }
    },
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "Can I register a startup in India without a co-founder?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "Yes, but your options are limited. Sole Proprietorship works for solo founders but offers no liability protection. LLP requires at least 2 partners. For Pvt Ltd, you need minimum 2 directors (you can add a family member as nominal director). Many solo indie devs start with Sole Proprietorship and convert later."
      }
    },
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "What documents do I need to register a company in India?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "You need: PAN card, Aadhaar card, passport-size photos, address proof (utility bill/bank statement), Digital Signature Certificate (DSC), and a registered office address (virtual office works). Your CA will guide you through the specific requirements for LLP or Pvt Ltd."
      }
    }
  ]
}
</script>
{{< /rawhtml >}}

**TL;DR:** Go LLP if you have a co-founder and want to move fast without raising soon. Pvt Ltd if you're raising VC money and can stomach the compliance. Get a CA, virtual office, and bank account. Share capital minimum is ₹1 (not ₹1 lakh, that's outdated, though your CA might default to it out of habit). Total damage: ₹25k-40k. Took me about 3-4 months, but should ideally take less than a month. Also, get your Startup India certificate - it's free and saves you 3 years of taxes.

---

Howdy!

I started [zappush.com](https://www.zappush.com) in August last year. The whole thing took me 3-5 months. After a lot of confused, frustrated nights staring at a product that was ready to make money but couldn't because I had no way to accept payments.

Every payment gateway accepting International transactions I tried wanted documentation I didn't have.

So I'm writing this for the engineer who's been so heads-down building that they forgot they need a legal entity to actually sell the thing. That was me.

{{< toc >}}

## Why Indie Devs and First-Time Founders Need a Legal Entity in India

Here's why:
- **Payment gateways** won't let you accept international payments without one. This sucks especially if the indian market is too price sensitive and you have a money hungry product.
- **WhatsApp Business API** requires it if you're planning to build on it (I wanted to back 2 years ago, And no one could get me access to it)
- **Banks** won't open a business account for you otherwise. You will have to use your personal account.
- **Clients** take you more seriously when there's a company behind the product
- **Meta Ads** will flag your account if you increase ad spend too fast.
- **Liability** if something goes wrong, you're personally liable. With a legal entity, there is legal separation between you and your business.

## Startup Registration Checklist India 2026: Step-by-Step

### Step 1: Get a CA

No reason to not. Whether it's through razorpay rize, RegisterKaro, or a kind CA friend of a cousin. This stuff is not straight forward, and founders tend to love building. Let the professionals handle the boring stuff. This bureaucracy exists to slow you down by design.


You can ALSO just get a company to do it for you. Razorpay Rize takes care of a lot of pains for you (From taking care of the address, to documents, to DIN etc).

Razorpay rize does say that they charge 1499 + Govt fees for incoperation in [here](https://razorpay.com/rize/company-registration/campaign). In reality, They partner up with a company to take care of the virtual office address registration which also has a decent fee (this would easily charge you 17k-25k for the company address. They also usually have a more expensive GST registration plan that they try to sell you). Expect this going in!

**About GST:** You can register GST for free, Feel free to tell the virtual office space provider that you will do it yourself instead of using their GST package and negotiate a good deal with your CA to sort this out instead. It will most likely be cheaper for you overall.

### Step 2: LLP vs Pvt Ltd vs Sole Proprietorship - Which to Choose?

| Entity Type | Who's involved | When to use it |
|------------|----------------|----------------|
| **Sole Proprietorship** | Just you | Solo operation, but you're personally liable for everything |
| **LLP** | 2+ partners | Fast setup, less compliance, works great with a co-founder |
| **Pvt Ltd** | 2-15 directors | Need to raise VC money, can handle the extra paperwork |

I was super confused what to pick. Lawyer student friends were biased towards Private Limited Company, But ex-founders wanted to avoid the regulatory hassle they brought. I ended up finding myself a co-founder, And chose **LLP**. This was regulatory wise simpler, While still allowing for multiple partners. Our bias towards speed made it the perfect choice.

**The catch with LLP:** You'll have to convert to Pvt Ltd if you want to raise proper funding. People can't usually invest in LLPs unless they become partners. It makes things more complicated.

**The catch with Sole Proprietorship:** There's no separation between you and the business. If the company gets sued, so do you.

**The catch with Pvt Ltd:** More regulatory burden. Still managable if you're ready!

**Resources if you want to DIY:**
- [Sole Proprietorship guide](https://www.bimakavach.com/blog/register-sole-proprietorship-india-step-by-step-guide/)
- [LLP guide](https://www.setindiabiz.com/blog/stepwise-process-for-llp-registration)
- [Pvt Ltd guide](https://cleartax.in/s/steps-to-register-private-limited-company)

### Step 3: Digital Signature Certificate (DSC)

Government forms need to be digitally signed. Get a DSC from eMudhra, Sify, or NSDL. They'll send you a USB dongle or email certificate.

[Official MCA info](https://www.mca.gov.in/content/mca/global/en/mca/dsc-services-v3/acquire-dsc.html)

### Step 4: Get your DIN (Director Identification Number)

Both you and your co-founder need one. Apply through the [MCA Portal](https://www.mca.gov.in/content/mca/global/en/foportal/fologin.html).

Heads up: Most tutorials online have dead links because MCA keeps changing their portal. The link above worked when I wrote this.

### Step 5: Name approval

Have 3-5 name options ready. The MCA will reject anything too similar to existing companies, and you can't use words like "National" or "Bank" without special approval.

Your CA runs the names through MCA's RUN service. Once approved, you have 20 days to file for incorporation or the name gets released.

### Step 6: File the forms

Your CA handles these:
- Form SPICe+ INC-32
- e-MOA and e-AOA
- PAN and TAN applications

Let them deal with it.

### Step 7: Virtual office

A virtual office costs ₹17k-22k for 11 months and gives you a proper business address that works for everything - GST, bank accounts, all of it.

This was my biggest bottleneck. Should've done it first. I ended up wasting too much time figuring out how to get a proper business address, whether I have to rent a physical office or not. A quick google search would have made my life easier.

### Step 8: Bank account

Call any of the major banks - Axis, HDFC, whatever's convenient. They'll send someone to your door with the paperwork. Takes a few days, and you'll get a debit card for each partner.

Two things I wish someone told me:

First, you need "share capital" to incorporate. Before 2015, this was ₹1 lakh minimum. Some CAs still quote this number out of habit. The actual minimum today? ₹1. Literally one rupee. Don't let anyone convince you otherwise.

Second, current accounts have minimum balance requirements. This varies by bank, so ask upfront. Nothing worse than getting hit with penalties because nobody mentioned this during onboarding.

---

## Best Payment Gateways for Indian Startups (International Payments)

Here's where things got frustrating.

I had a working product in 2024-2025. I was ready to launch. Then I realized that I had no way to receive subscription money.

After doing some research, I found that:


**Stripe:** Invite-only in India. I wasn't invited. I asked a friend of a friend to invite me, but they never responded. It slowed things down more.

**Lemon Squeezy:** Needed business documents. I had none. I tried reaching out to their support team, but they didn't respond. It slowed things down more.

**PhonePe, Razorpay, PayU, CCAvenue:** They'd onboard me for domestic payments, but didn't allow international payments without a registered company. My product's target market was international and Indian pricing wouldn't keep the lights on. Talking to each of these vendors slowed things a few more weeks.

**PayPal:** I ended up wanting to use this but I found a few too many reddit horror stories by indian indie devs and business owners about frozen accounts. It doesn't have a good reputation in the space.

**Razorpay (again):** They create subscriptions packages in INR, but I needed USD billing. Looking back, I should've just launched with INR and figured it out later.

### Best Payment Gateway for Indie Devs in India

I SHOULD have just launched with Dodopayments. [DodoPayments](https://dodopayments.com) is designed for indie devs in exactly this situation. It's a great solution and I love the team behind it :)

I am just afraid of any regulatory hammers that might come their way. Hoping for the best for them.

Whatever you pick, make sure they have subscription API support. You don't want to find out they don't after you've integrated everything.

---

## Startup Registration Cost in India 2026

| Item | Cost |
|------|------|
| LLP Registration (through a service) | ₹8,000-15,000 |
| Virtual Office (11 months) | ₹17,000-22,000 |
| GST Registration | Free, or whatever your CA does it for (can be 5k-10k) |
| **Total** | **₹25,000-40,000** |

---

## How Long Does Company Registration Take in India? 

### How much it should take

| Step | Duration |
|------|----------|
| DSC | 1-2 days |
| DIN | 3-5 days |
| Name Approval | 2-4 days |
| Incorporation | 5-7 days |
| Virtual Office | 1-2 weeks (Expect back and forth) |
| Bank Account | 1-2 weeks (Expect signature related troubles) |
| GST Registration | 7-15 days |

### How much it ended up taking me: 3-5 months

What went wrong:

- **I didn't know where to start.** Spent weeks asking friends, reading contradictory advice, going in circles.
- **Documents kept bouncing back.** missing signatures and forgot my 20 day name approval limit :) 
- **Virtual office took forever.** Almost a month to finalize. Should've started here.
- **Payment gateway approval dragged on.** Even after registration, getting approved for international transactions took more weeks.

If you know exactly what to do and have everything ready, you can probably finish in a month. Get yourself a professional to help you out for this.

---

## Word of Advice

Get yourself a [Startup India certificate](https://www.startupindia.gov.in/content/sih/en/blockchainverify/about.html). It saves you taxes for 3 financial years out of 10. You get to choose when to redeem it. It's free and worth doing early.

---

## Need Help Registering Your Startup in India?

I've been through this, and I'm happy to help other first-time founders and indie devs avoid my mistakes. Reach out: **aditya@zappush.com**

I'll share referrals, answer questions, whatever's useful. I genuinely believe more people should be starting companies, and this guide should help you get there faster than I did.

Commit message:

docs: add community advice on business structures

hugo-blog/content/blog/indie-dev-first-time-founder-india-startup-guide.md, after:

---
title: "Indie Dev & First-Time Founder Guide: Register Your Startup in India (2026)"
date: 2026-02-01
draft: false
description: "Go LLP if you have a co-founder and want to move fast without raising soon. Pvt Ltd if you're raising VC money. Get a CA, virtual office, and bank account. Share capital minimum is ₹1 (not ₹1 lakh). Total: ₹25k-40k."
keywords: ["startup registration india 2026", "how to register startup in india", "LLP vs Pvt Ltd india startup", "indie dev india company registration", "first time founder india", "payment gateway india international", "startup registration cost india", "company registration checklist india"]
tags: ["startup", "india", "entrepreneurship", "founder-guide", "indie-dev"]
author: "Aditya"
images: ["/images/landing.jpg"]
---

{{< rawhtml >}}
<script type="application/ld+json">
{
  "@context": "https://schema.org",
  "@type": "Article",
  "headline": "Indie Dev & First-Time Founder Guide: Register Your Startup in India (2026)",
  "author": {
    "@type": "Person",
    "name": "Aditya",
    "url": "https://twitter.com/0x0elliot"
  },
  "datePublished": "2026-02-01",
  "dateModified": "2026-02-01",
  "publisher": {
    "@type": "Organization",
    "name": "ShipFast Blog",
    "url": "https://www.shipfast.blog",
    "logo": {
      "@type": "ImageObject",
      "url": "https://www.shipfast.blog/favicon.png"
    }
  },
  "description": "Go LLP if you have a co-founder and want to move fast without raising soon. Pvt Ltd if you're raising VC money. Get a CA, virtual office, and bank account. Share capital minimum is ₹1 (not ₹1 lakh). Total: ₹25k-40k.",
  "image": "https://www.shipfast.blog/images/landing.jpg",
  "mainEntityOfPage": {
    "@type": "WebPage",
    "@id": "https://www.shipfast.blog/blog/indie-dev-first-time-founder-india-startup-guide/"
  },
  "articleSection": "Startup Guide",
  "wordCount": 1500
}
</script>
<script type="application/ld+json">
{
  "@context": "https://schema.org",
  "@type": "FAQPage",
  "mainEntity": [
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "How much does it cost to register a startup in India in 2026?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "Total cost ranges from ₹25,000-40,000. This includes LLP registration (₹8,000-15,000), virtual office for 11 months (₹17,000-22,000), and GST registration (free to ₹10,000 if done through a CA)."
      }
    },
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "What is the difference between LLP and Pvt Ltd for Indian startups?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "LLP (Limited Liability Partnership) has less compliance burden and faster setup, ideal for bootstrapped startups with co-founders. Pvt Ltd is required if you plan to raise VC funding, as investors can't easily invest in LLPs. LLP requires 2+ partners, Pvt Ltd allows 2-15 directors."
      }
    },
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "How long does it take to register a company in India?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "Ideally 3-4 weeks if you have all documents ready: DSC (1-2 days), DIN (3-5 days), Name Approval (2-4 days), Incorporation (5-7 days), Virtual Office (1-2 weeks), Bank Account (1-2 weeks), GST (7-15 days). First-time founders often take 3-5 months due to document issues and learning curve."
      }
    },
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "Can indie devs accept international payments without a company in India?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "Most payment gateways (Stripe, Razorpay, PayU) require a registered company for international payments. DodoPayments is one option designed for indie devs that may work without full company registration, though regulatory landscape may change."
      }
    },
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "Do I need a physical office to register a startup in India?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "No. A virtual office (₹17,000-22,000 for 11 months) provides a registered business address that works for GST registration, bank accounts, and all official purposes. This is the standard approach for most indie devs and first-time founders."
      }
    },
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "Do I need a CA or lawyer to register a startup in India?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "A CA (Chartered Accountant) is highly recommended - they handle DSC, DIN, name approval, incorporation forms, and GST registration. You don't necessarily need a lawyer for basic registration. Services like Razorpay Rize bundle CA services. Expect to pay ₹8,000-15,000 for CA-assisted registration."
      }
    },
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "Can I register a startup in India without a co-founder?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "Yes, but your options are limited. Sole Proprietorship works for solo founders but offers no liability protection. LLP requires at least 2 partners. For Pvt Ltd, you need minimum 2 directors (you can add a family member as nominal director). Many solo indie devs start with Sole Proprietorship and convert later."
      }
    },
    {
      "@type": "Question",
      "name": "What documents do I need to register a company in India?",
      "acceptedAnswer": {
        "@type": "Answer",
        "text": "You need: PAN card, Aadhaar card, passport-size photos, address proof (utility bill/bank statement), Digital Signature Certificate (DSC), and a registered office address (virtual office works). Your CA will guide you through the specific requirements for LLP or Pvt Ltd."
      }
    }
  ]
}
</script>
{{< /rawhtml >}}

**TL;DR:** Go LLP if you have a co-founder and want to move fast without raising soon. Pvt Ltd if you're raising VC money and can stomach the compliance. Get a CA, virtual office, and bank account. Share capital minimum is ₹1 (not ₹1 lakh, that's outdated, though your CA might default to it out of habit). Total damage: ₹25k-40k. Took me about 3-4 months, but should ideally take less than a month. Also, get your Startup India certificate - it's free and saves you 3 years of taxes.

---

Howdy!

I started [zappush.com](https://www.zappush.com) in August last year. The whole thing took me 3-5 months. After a lot of confused, frustrated nights staring at a product that was ready to make money but couldn't because I had no way to accept payments.

Every payment gateway accepting International transactions I tried wanted documentation I didn't have.

So I'm writing this for the engineer who's been so heads-down building that they forgot they need a legal entity to actually sell the thing. That was me.

{{< toc >}}

## Why Indie Devs and First-Time Founders Need a Legal Entity in India

Here's why:
- **Payment gateways** won't let you accept international payments without one. This sucks especially if the indian market is too price sensitive and you have a money hungry product.
- **WhatsApp Business API** requires it if you're planning to build on it (I wanted to back 2 years ago, And no one could get me access to it)
- **Banks** won't open a business account for you otherwise. You will have to use your personal account.
- **Clients** take you more seriously when there's a company behind the product
- **Meta Ads** will flag your account if you increase ad spend too fast.
- **Liability** if something goes wrong, you're personally liable. With a legal entity, there is legal separation between you and your business.

## Startup Registration Checklist India 2026: Step-by-Step

### Step 1: Get a CA

No reason to not. Whether it's through razorpay rize, RegisterKaro, or a kind CA friend of a cousin. This stuff is not straight forward, and founders tend to love building. Let the professionals handle the boring stuff. This bureaucracy exists to slow you down by design.


You can ALSO just get a company to do it for you. Razorpay Rize takes care of a lot of pains for you (From taking care of the address, to documents, to DIN etc).

Razorpay rize does say that they charge 1499 + Govt fees for incoperation in [here](https://razorpay.com/rize/company-registration/campaign). In reality, They partner up with a company to take care of the virtual office address registration which also has a decent fee (this would easily charge you 17k-25k for the company address. They also usually have a more expensive GST registration plan that they try to sell you). Expect this going in!

**About GST:** You can register GST for free, Feel free to tell the virtual office space provider that you will do it yourself instead of using their GST package and negotiate a good deal with your CA to sort this out instead. It will most likely be cheaper for you overall.

### Step 2: LLP vs Pvt Ltd vs Sole Proprietorship - Which to Choose?

| Entity Type | Who's involved | When to use it |
|------------|----------------|----------------|
| **Sole Proprietorship** | Just you | Solo operation, but you're personally liable for everything |
| **LLP** | 2+ partners | Fast setup, less compliance, works great with a co-founder |
| **Pvt Ltd** | 2-15 directors | Need to raise VC money, can handle the extra paperwork |

I was super confused what to pick. Lawyer student friends were biased towards Private Limited Company, But ex-founders wanted to avoid the regulatory hassle they brought. I ended up finding myself a co-founder, And chose **LLP**. This was regulatory wise simpler, While still allowing for multiple partners. Our bias towards speed made it the perfect choice.

**The catch with LLP:** You'll have to convert to Pvt Ltd if you want to raise proper funding. People can't usually invest in LLPs unless they become partners. It makes things more complicated.

**The catch with Sole Proprietorship:** There's no separation between you and the business. If the company gets sued, so do you.

**The catch with Pvt Ltd:** More regulatory burden. Still managable if you're ready!

**Resources if you want to DIY:**
- [Sole Proprietorship guide](https://www.bimakavach.com/blog/register-sole-proprietorship-india-step-by-step-guide/)
- [LLP guide](https://www.setindiabiz.com/blog/stepwise-process-for-llp-registration)
- [Pvt Ltd guide](https://cleartax.in/s/steps-to-register-private-limited-company)

#### Notes from the community - r/indiehackersindia

Also, the community gave some pretty good advice about their experiences:

![Hey thanks for the clarification i too will be going with LLP soon i guess i will taking my brother as cofounder. Also i wanted to let people know, i started with sole proprietorship i didn't wait for registration and all to launch it was very easy with razorpay, matter of fact i have international payment full fledge enabled as well they did it themselves after one of my customer trying to buy from africa failed to pay and i raised a ticket with razorpay and as a solution to that ticket they enabled international payment](/images/razorpay-sole-prop-international.png)

![Good article but is missing a core aspect that many might need to know. Single owner but wants liability protection: OPC. OPC allows protection for a single owner similar to llp. Allows for easy conversion into llp in future. Disadvantage being - mandatory compliance audit irrespective of annual turnover.](/images/opc-advice.png)

### Step 3: Digital Signature Certificate (DSC)

Government forms need to be digitally signed. Get a DSC from eMudhra, Sify, or NSDL. They'll send you a USB dongle or email certificate.

[Official MCA info](https://www.mca.gov.in/content/mca/global/en/mca/dsc-services-v3/acquire-dsc.html)

### Step 4: Get your DIN (Director Identification Number)

Both you and your co-founder need one. Apply through the [MCA Portal](https://www.mca.gov.in/content/mca/global/en/foportal/fologin.html).

Heads up: Most tutorials online have dead links because MCA keeps changing their portal. The link above worked when I wrote this.

### Step 5: Name approval

Have 3-5 name options ready. The MCA will reject anything too similar to existing companies, and you can't use words like "National" or "Bank" without special approval.

Your CA runs the names through MCA's RUN service. Once approved, you have 20 days to file for incorporation or the name gets released.

### Step 6: File the forms

Your CA handles these:
- Form SPICe+ INC-32
- e-MOA and e-AOA
- PAN and TAN applications

Let them deal with it.

### Step 7: Virtual office

A virtual office costs ₹17k-22k for 11 months and gives you a proper business address that works for everything - GST, bank accounts, all of it.

This was my biggest bottleneck. Should've done it first. I ended up wasting too much time figuring out how to get a proper business address, whether I have to rent a physical office or not. A quick google search would have made my life easier.

### Step 8: Bank account

Call any of the major banks - Axis, HDFC, whatever's convenient. They'll send someone to your door with the paperwork. Takes a few days, and you'll get a debit card for each partner.

Two things I wish someone told me:

First, you need "share capital" to incorporate. Before 2015, this was ₹1 lakh minimum. Some CAs still quote this number out of habit. The actual minimum today? ₹1. Literally one rupee. Don't let anyone convince you otherwise.

Second, current accounts have minimum balance requirements. This varies by bank, so ask upfront. Nothing worse than getting hit with penalties because nobody mentioned this during onboarding.

---

## Best Payment Gateways for Indian Startups (International Payments)

Here's where things got frustrating.

I had a working product in 2024-2025. I was ready to launch. Then I realized that I had no way to receive subscription money.

After doing some research, I found that:


**Stripe:** Invite-only in India. I wasn't invited. I asked a friend of a friend to invite me, but they never responded. It slowed things down more.

**Lemon Squeezy:** Needed business documents. I had none. I tried reaching out to their support team, but they didn't respond. It slowed things down more.

**PhonePe, Razorpay, PayU, CCAvenue:** They'd onboard me for domestic payments, but didn't allow international payments without a registered company. My product's target market was international and Indian pricing wouldn't keep the lights on. Talking to each of these vendors slowed things a few more weeks.

**PayPal:** I ended up wanting to use this but I found a few too many reddit horror stories by indian indie devs and business owners about frozen accounts. It doesn't have a good reputation in the space.

**Razorpay (again):** They create subscriptions packages in INR, but I needed USD billing. Looking back, I should've just launched with INR and figured it out later.

### Best Payment Gateway for Indie Devs in India

I SHOULD have just launched with Dodopayments. [DodoPayments](https://dodopayments.com) is designed for indie devs in exactly this situation. It's a great solution and I love the team behind it :)

I am just afraid of any regulatory hammers that might come their way. Hoping for the best for them.

Whatever you pick, make sure they have subscription API support. You don't want to find out they don't after you've integrated everything.

---

## Startup Registration Cost in India 2026

| Item | Cost |
|------|------|
| LLP Registration (through a service) | ₹8,000-15,000 |
| Virtual Office (11 months) | ₹17,000-22,000 |
| GST Registration | Free, or whatever your CA does it for (can be 5k-10k) |
| **Total** | **₹25,000-40,000** |

---

## How Long Does Company Registration Take in India? 

### How much it should take

| Step | Duration |
|------|----------|
| DSC | 1-2 days |
| DIN | 3-5 days |
| Name Approval | 2-4 days |
| Incorporation | 5-7 days |
| Virtual Office | 1-2 weeks (Expect back and forth) |
| Bank Account | 1-2 weeks (Expect signature related troubles) |
| GST Registration | 7-15 days |

### How much it ended up taking me: 3-5 months

What went wrong:

- **I didn't know where to start.** Spent weeks asking friends, reading contradictory advice, going in circles.
- **Documents kept bouncing back.** missing signatures and forgot my 20 day name approval limit :) 
- **Virtual office took forever.** Almost a month to finalize. Should've started here.
- **Payment gateway approval dragged on.** Even after registration, getting approved for international transactions took more weeks.

If you know exactly what to do and have everything ready, you can probably finish in a month. Get yourself a professional to help you out for this.

---

## Word of Advice

Get yourself a [Startup India certificate](https://www.startupindia.gov.in/content/sih/en/blockchainverify/about.html). It saves you taxes for 3 financial years out of 10. You get to choose when to redeem it. It's free and worth doing early.

---

## Need Help Registering Your Startup in India?

I've been through this, and I'm happy to help other first-time founders and indie devs avoid my mistakes. Reach out: **aditya@zappush.com**

I'll share referrals, answer questions, whatever's useful. I genuinely believe more people should be starting companies, and this guide should help you get there faster than I did.
